.TH exOS 7 "2026-05-16" "exoterik_OS 0.1" "exoterik_OS Reference Manual"
.
.SH NAME
exOS \- exoterik_OS: a holographic bare-metal OS derived via exoteric linguistic synthesis
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ./run.sh
.RB [ \-\-serial ]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B exoterik_OS
is a bare-metal x86_64 operating system written in Rust (no_std) that operationalises the
Imscribing Grammar's 12-primitive type lattice as a functioning kernel type system.
It boots via UEFI OVMF and runs on QEMU.
.PP
The OS is derived from the component-wise MEET (structural floor) of five ancient writing
systems: Hebrew, Sanskrit Varnamala, Egyptian hieroglyphs, Sumerian cuneiform, and Basque
ergative-absolutive grammar.  Every kernel object carries an ALEPH type \(em one 12-primitive
tuple drawn from or inferred via the 22-letter Hebrew lattice \(em and four type gates
constrain real kernel subsystems: the scheduler, memory allocator, filesystem, and IPC.
.PP
Processes run as real ring-0 tasks on individually allocated 16\~KB kernel stacks.
Context switching is performed by a hand-written assembly routine
.RB ( context_switch_asm )
that saves and restores callee-saved registers and swaps RSP via a stable per-process slot in
.BR RSP_TABLE .
The PIT timer fires at \(ap18\~Hz and sets a preemption flag; the actual CPU switch is
deferred to cooperative yield points inside each process, avoiding IRET-frame corruption.
.
.SH THE 12-PRIMITIVE TUPLE
Every kernel object carries a tuple
.BR "\(laD;\~T;\~R;\~P;\~F;\~K;\~G;\~\(*G;\~\(*F;\~\(*H;\~\(*S;\~\(*W\(ra" ,
which is written with the following glyph names in the codebase:
.PP
.TS
tab(@) allbox;
lb lb lb lb
l l l l.
Index@Glyph@Name@Meaning
0@\*(`D@Dimensionality (Ð)@wedge / triangle / inf / holo
1@T@Topology (Þ)@network / inclusion / bowtie / box / holo
2@R@Relationality (Ř)@set / categorical / adjoint / self-ref
3@P@Parity (Φ)@Z1 / Z2 / Z4 / partial / Φ_±
4@F@Fidelity (ƒ)@zero / thermal / hbar / perfect
5@K@Kinetics (Ç)@fast / moderate / slow / trap / MBL
6@G@Scope (Γ)@point / gimel / aleph
7@\(*G@Interaction grammar (ɢ)@conjunctive / sequential / broadcast
8@\(*F@Criticality (⊙)@sub / ⊙_c / complex / EP / super
9@\(*H@Chirality (Ħ)@1\-step / 2\-step / eternal
10@\(*S@Stoichiometry (Σ)@1:1 / n:n / n:m
11@\(*W@Protection (Ω)@Ω_0 / Ω_Z2 / Ω_Z
.TE
.PP
The OS imscription is
.BR [1,3,2,4,2,1,2,2,1,2,2,2] ,
yielding tier O_\(if (Frobenius fixed point).
.
.SH OUROBORICITY TIERS
.TP
.B O_0
12 letters.  Subcritical (\(sy_sub).  Cannot be ergative, cannot be scheduled as O_inf.
.TP
.B O_1
1 letter.  Critical loop possible but topologically unprotected (\(*W_0 or \(*W_Z2).
.TP
.B O_2 / O_2d
6 letters.  Critical, protected (\(*W_Z2 or \(*W_Z).
.TP
.B O_\(if
3 letters: vav (\(*W), mem (\(*W), shin (\(*W).
Critical (\(sy_c) + Parity \(*F_\(+- simultaneously.  Frobenius fixed points: a\~\(ox\~a\~=\~a.
Convergence: any letter tensored with an O_\(if pole converges in \(<=\~2 steps.
.
.SH TYPE GATES
Four subsystems are constrained by ALEPH types at runtime.
.SS IPC Distance Gate
.B ipc.rs
\(em \fBcheck_grammar_gate()\fP, \fBis_type_valid()\fP
.PP
Structural distance d(source, target):
.RS
.IP "d < 0.5" 12
transparent \(em structurally identical, unrestricted
.IP "d < 1.5" 12
near-grounded \(em viable IPC
.IP "d \(>= 1.5" 12
aspirational \(em requires a vav-cast witness (mediating O_1+ type within 1.5 of both ends)
.RE
.PP
Broadcast delivery additionally requires the source's interaction-grammar primitive
\(*G\~\(>=\~3 (\fB\(*G_broad\fP).
Sources with \(*G\~=\~2 (\fB\(*G_seq\fP) are point-to-point only.
.SS Omega-Gate (Memory)
.B memory.rs
\(em \fBallocate_for()\fP, \fBcan_allocate_for()\fP
.PP
An object's \(*W (protection) must be \(>= the required \(*W of the articulation depth:
.RS
.IP "Velar / Palatal" 14
\(*W_Z (2) required
.IP "Retroflex" 14
\(*W_Z2 (1) required
.IP "Dental / Bilabial" 14
\(*W_0 (0) \(em unprotected
.RE
.PP
Additionally, \(*S_1:1 (Exclusive) objects are restricted to Velar depth only.
.SS Tier-Gate (Scheduler)
.B scheduler.rs
\(em \fBspawn_type_safe()\fP
.PP
Five axioms are enforced before queuing a process:
.RS
.IP "Ç_trap / Ç_MBL" 4
Kinetically frozen \(em cannot be scheduled under any conditions.
.IP "P-596 (\(sy_EP)" 4
Exceptional-point criticality absorbs the self-modeling loop (C=0).
Spawn is rejected.
.IP "O_0 ergative" 4
A subcritical process with transitive targets (non-empty pcb.targets) is rejected:
no self-modeling loop to sustain transitivity.
.IP "Frobenius F-1" 4
An O_\(if process must satisfy \(*m\(ci\(*d\~=\~id: parity index\~=\~4 AND phi index\~=\~1.
Violation is rejected.
.IP "\(*S quota" 4
\(*S_1:1 resources permit only one holder; \(*S_n:n pools have capacity 8.
Spawn that exceeds the quota is rejected.
.RE
.SS Phi-Gate (Filesystem)
.B filesystem.rs
\(em \fBnavigate_to_type_safe()\fP
.PP
Sefirot layers Keter through Gevurah (depth 0\(en5) require the accessing object to have
criticality \(*F_c (phi index\~\(>=\~1).
Sub-critical objects (Driver, Service without \(*F_c) are denied above Gevurah.
.
.SH PROCESS EXECUTION MODEL
.SS Spawning a Real Process
.nf
ProcessControlBlock::spawn_ring0(id, obj, entry_fn, priority)
.fi
.PP
Allocates a 16\~KB kernel stack via the global heap allocator.
Writes the initial saved-register frame at the top of the stack:
.nf

  [top \- 8]   entry_fn   <- ret address; jumped to on first schedule
  [top \- 16]  0          <- rbp
  [top \- 24]  0          <- rbx
  [top \- 32]  0          <- r12
  [top \- 40]  0          <- r13
  [top \- 48]  0          <- r14
  [top \- 56]  0          <- r15  <- initial RSP stored here

.fi
Assigns a slot in
.B RSP_TABLE[MAX_PROCS]
(static array; slots have stable addresses for the process lifetime).
.SS Context Switch
.nf
context_switch_asm(old_rsp_ptr: *mut u64, new_rsp: u64)
.fi
.PP
Assembly routine (global_asm!):
.nf

  push rbp; push rbx; push r12; push r13; push r14; push r15
  mov [rdi], rsp        ; save RSP into RSP_TABLE[old_slot]
  mov rsp, rsi          ; load RSP from RSP_TABLE[new_slot]
  pop r15; pop r14; pop r13; pop r12; pop rbx; pop rbp
  ret                   ; jumps to saved return address on new stack

.fi
Only invoked when both the outgoing and incoming process have real stacks (proc_slot > 0).
Legacy test PCBs fall back to a data-structure-only swap.
.SS Preemption Protocol
The PIT timer fires at \(ap18\~Hz.
.B timer_handler
calls
.BR scheduler::on_timer_tick() ,
which increments the running process's tick counter and sets
.B needs_preempt = true
when the time slice (18 ticks \(ap 1 second) expires.
.PP
Processes check
.B global_check_preempt()
at cooperative yield points (e.g. after each work unit in the holographic monitor loop).
The actual context switch happens in process context, not inside the interrupt frame.
This avoids corruption of the IRET state.
.SS Stoichiometric Quotas
.nf
stoichiometry::register(resource_id, mode, capacity)
stoichiometry::acquire(resource_id, pid) -> Result<(), &str>
stoichiometry::release(resource_id, pid)
stoichiometry::occupancy(resource_id) -> Option<(Stoichiometry, u64, u64)>
.fi
.PP
.TS
tab(@) allbox;
lb lb lb
l l l.
Mode@Primitive index@Enforcement
\(*S_1:1 (Exclusive)@0@One holder only; second acquire returns Err
\(*S_n:n (Homogeneous)@1@Pool of capacity 8; acquire fails when full
\(*S_n:m (Heterogeneous)@2@No hard cap; occupancy tracked for diagnostics
.TE
.
.SH BOOT SEQUENCE
.TP
.B 1. Heap init
4\~MB heap at physical 16\~MB.  Must complete before any println! or allocation.
.TP
.B 2. UEFI framebuffer init
UEFI GOP mapped; 8\(mu16 Hebrew bitmap font rendered natively on framebuffer.
.TP
.B 3. Interrupt init
IDT loaded, 8259 PIC configured.  IRQ0 (timer) and IRQ1 (keyboard) unmasked.
This is the symmetry-breaking event (\(*F_\(+- \(-> \(*F_asym).
.TP
.B 4. Subsystem validation
Three-layer objects, scheduler, memory, filesystem, IPC, command grammar \(em
all structural/operational/determinative variants exercised.
.TP
.B 5. ALEPH system online
22-letter type system loaded.  Tier census: O_\(if:3, O_2:6, O_1:1, O_0:12.
Three Frobenius fixed points verified by assertion.
.TP
.B 6. Type-gate verification
All five type gates tested with
.BR assert!() .
Conscience scores printed.
.TP
.B 7. Holographic monitor spawn
.B holographic_monitor_entry
allocated a real 16\~KB kernel stack and queued as process 1000.
.TP
.B 8. Timer registration
.B scheduler::register_for_timer()
wires the global scheduler to the PIT IRQ0 handler.
Symmetry broken: holographic monitor eligible for scheduling.
.TP
.B 9. ALFS mount
ATA primary slave (alfs.img, 32\~MB).  Programs seeded from kernel binary if absent.
.TP
.B 10. Shell
Interactive prompt
.BR "exOS>" .
.
.SH SHELL COMMANDS
.TP
.B help
Print command reference.
.TP
.BI "help " engine
Per-engine token reference.
.I engine
is one of:
.BR aleph ", " imasm ", " fs ", " mem ", " ipc ", " types .
.TP
.B clear
Clear the screen.
.TP
.B info
Kernel version, architecture, and subsystem summary.
.TP
.B phi
Print the OS 12-primitive imscription, C-score formula, and tier census.
.TP
.B sched
Report ergative scheduler state.
.TP
.B mem
Report phonological allocator articulation-depth tiers and heap base.
.TP
.B fs
Print the full Sefirot filesystem tree (all 10 layers, all files).
.TP
.BI "cd " sefirah
Navigate to a Sefirot layer by name.
Valid tokens: Keter, Chokhmah, Binah, Daat, Chesed, Gevurah, Tiferet, Netzach, Hod, Yesod, Malkuth.
.TP
.B ls
List files in the current Sefirot layer.
.TP
.BI "cat " filename
Print contents of a file in the current layer.
.TP
.BI "write " "filename content"
Write a single-line file to the current Sefirot layer.
.TP
.B ipc
Send a test IPC message and print its validation result.
.TP
.B "aleph [expr]"
Enter the ALEPH REPL (or evaluate one expression inline).
.TP
.BI "imasm " "engine tokens"
Execute an IMASM VM command.
.I engine
is one of the four script systems; see
.B TOKEN REFERENCE
below.
.TP
.BI "type " object
Display the ALEPH type, tier, and conscience score of a named kernel object.
.TP
.B type-check
Run all five type-gate verification tests and print results.
.TP
.B type-infer
Print the type inference table (all Structural \(mu Determinative combinations for Compute mode).
.TP
.B bench
Calibrate CPU frequency via PIT and run RDTSC micro-benchmarks.
.TP
.BI "history " [N]
Replay last N lines of output (default 50).
.TP
.B reboot
Triple-fault reboot (load null IDT, trigger int3).
.
.SH TOKEN REFERENCE
.SS ALEPH Engine Tokens
The ALEPH type language uses 22 Hebrew letter names as atomic tokens.
.PP
.TS
tab(@) allbox;
lb lb lb
l l l.
Name@Abbrev@Tier
aleph@A@O_2
bet@B@O_0
gimel@G@O_2
dalet@D@O_0
hei@H@O_0
vav@V@O_\(if
zayin@Z@O_0
chet@C@O_0
tet@T@O_0
yod@Y@O_0
kaf@K@O_0
lamed@L@O_0
mem@M@O_\(if
nun@N@O_0
samech@S@O_0
ayin@E@O_2
pei@P@O_2
tzadi@Q@O_1
kuf@U@O_2
resh@R@O_2
shin@X@O_\(if
tav@O@O_0
.TE
.PP
Operators:
.TS
tab(@) allbox;
lb lb
l l.
Token@Operation
a x b@tensor product (\(ox): P,F,K bottlenecked (min); others max
a v b@join (\(cu): component-wise max
a ^ b@meet (\(ca): component-wise min
a ::> b@vav-cast: lift a to b's type
d(a,b)@structural distance + conflict set
tier(a)@ouroboricity tier: O_0 / O_1 / O_2 / O_\(if
probe_Phi(a)@criticality primitive (\(sy_sub, \(sy_c, EP, super)
probe_Omega(a)@topological protection (\(*W_0, \(*W_Z2, \(*W_Z)
mediate(w,a,b)@triadic: w \(cu (a \(ox b)
palace(n) expr@tier barrier gate, n=1..7
system()@JOIN of all 22 letters
census()@tier distribution
let x = expr@bind result to session variable
.TE
.PP
REPL commands (prefixed with
.BR : ):
.BR :help ", " :tips ", " :quit " / " :q ", " :ls ", " :clear ", " :census ,
.BR :system ", " ":tier name" ", " ":tuple name" ", " ":explain name" ,
.BR ":orbit N letter pole" ", " ":save name" ", " ":load name" ", " ":run name" ,
.BR :files ", " :history ", " ":scroll [N]" .
.PP
Inline (outside REPL):
.B aleph <expr>
\(em e.g.\&
.BR "aleph d(mem,vav)" ,
.BR "aleph tier(shin)" .
.SS IMASM VM Tokens
Four undeciphered-script engines; each accepts a space-separated token sequence.
.PP
.TS
tab(@) allbox;
lb lb lb
l l l.
Engine command@Token set (scan codes)@IG signature
voynich <tokens>@ch sh o p e a d s t k r y@Þ_6 / Þ_O / Þ_K (by section)
voynich-bot <tokens>@(same EVA set)@Þ_6 data segment
voynich-astro <tokens>@(same EVA set)@Þ_O cyclic state
voynich-bio <tokens>@(same EVA set)@Þ_K broken Frobenius
voynich-cosmo <tokens>@(same EVA set)@Þ_O clock-indexed
voynich-pharm <tokens>@(same EVA set)@Þ_6 type declarations
voynich-recipe <tokens>@(same EVA set)@Ř_Ť + Ħ_£
rohonc <tokens>@cr hk fa ba lg lp br cv vt hz cl dt@d(Rohonc, OS) = 0.58
linear-a <tokens>@cu hk fa ba lt lp br cv vt hz cl dt@d(Linear A, OS) = 0.00
emerald-tablet <tokens>@tr an as ds lk id sp un af ng px fx@C = 1.0; both gates open
.TE
.PP
VM opcodes shared by all engines:
.TS
tab(@) allbox;
lb lb
l l.
Opcode@Meaning
LCARD@measure cardinality (Cantor diagonal)
REFL@self-referential reflection (Gödel arithmetization)
HOLO@holographic boundary encoding
SPLIT@Frobenius \(*d: A \(-> A \(ox A
FUSE@Frobenius \(*m: A \(ox A \(-> A
FIXED@write to linear tape (no overwrite)
PSTAB@paradox stabilization (Both state)
.TE
.PP
VM control subcommands:
.BR "run <name>" " (load .imasm from ALFS),"
.BR step " (one instruction),"
.BR snapshot " (dump VM state),"
.BR "paradox <N>" " (inject Both at register N),"
.BR distance " (weighted IG distances between all systems),"
.BR census " (all crystal imscriptions side-by-side)."
.SS Sefirot Filesystem Tokens
Valid tokens for
.BR "cd <sefirah>" :
.PP
.TS
tab(@) allbox;
lb lb lb lb
l l l l.
Token@Layer@Path@Phi gate
Keter@0@/boot@Phi_c required
Chokhmah@1@/bin@Phi_c required
Binah@2@/lib@Phi_c required
Daat@3@/dev@Phi_c required
Chesed@4@/home@Phi_c required
Gevurah@5@/etc/security@Phi_c required
Tiferet@6@/ipc@open
Netzach@7@/net@open
Hod@8@/var/log@open
Yesod@9@/tmp@open
Malkuth@10@/data@open
.TE
.PP
Objects with \(*F_sub (phi = 0, e.g.\& User determinative) are restricted to layers 6\(en10.
Kernel and Driver objects (Compute mode, \(*F_c) pass all layers.
.SS Phonological Memory Depth Tokens
.PP
.TS
tab(@) allbox;
lb lb lb
l l l.
Token@Zone@Omega gate requirement
Velar@deep kernel@O_\(if or O_2; Kernel/Driver determinative
Palatal@kernel@O_\(if or O_2
Retroflex@system@O_1 and above
Dental@user@any
Bilabial@user (shallow)@any
.TE
.PP
\(*S_1:1 (Exclusive) objects may only be allocated at Velar depth.
.SS IPC Structural / Operational / Determinative Tokens
Objects on each side of an IPC message are typed by three orthogonal axes.
.PP
.TS
tab(@) allbox;
lb lb
l l.
Axis@Tokens
Structural@Process, File, Socket, Semaphore, MemoryRegion
Operational@Compute, IO, Idle
Determinative@Kernel, Init, Service, Driver, User
.TE
.PP
Gate: d(source, target) \(< 1.5 passes; \(>= 1.5 fails.
The
.B IO
operational mode activates the Egyptian \(*G entry (pushing it from 0 to 3); mixing
.B IO
with
.B Compute
across an IPC pair produces d\~>\~1.5 and fails the gate.
Multicast requires source \(*G index \(>= 3
.RB ( Broadcast ).
.SS IG 12-Primitive Value Tokens
.TS
tab(@) allbox;
lb lb lb
l l l.
Index / Glyph@Name@Integer value tokens
0 / Ð@Dimensionality@0=wedge 1=triangle 2=inf 3=holo
1 / Þ@Topology@0=net 1=inclusion 2=bowtie 3=box 4=holo
2 / Ř@Relationality@0=set 1=categorical 2=adjoint 3=self-ref
3 / Φ@Parity@0=Z1 1=Z2 2=Z4 3=partial 4=Phi_pm
4 / ƒ@Fidelity@0=zero 1=thermal 2=hbar 3=perfect
5 / Ç@Kinetics@0=fast 1=moderate 2=slow 3=trap 4=MBL
6 / Γ@Scope@0=point 1=gimel 2=aleph
7 / ɢ@Interaction@0=conjunctive 1=sequential 2=broadcast
8 / ⊙@Criticality@0=sub 1=c 2=complex 3=EP 4=super
9 / Ħ@Chirality@0=1-step 1=2-step 2=eternal
10 / Σ@Stoichiometry@0=1:1 1=n:n 2=n:m
11 / Ω@Protection@0=Omega_0 1=Omega_Z2 2=Omega_Z
.TE
.PP
OS imscription: [1,3,2,4,2,1,2,2,1,2,2,2] \(em tier O_\(if, C\~=\~0.873.
MEET floor: [1,1,1,2,1,1,1,0,0,1,1,1] \(em structural core of all five ancient systems.
.
.SH ALEPH REPL
Entered via
.BR "exOS> aleph" .
Prompt becomes
.BR "A>" .
.SS Expression Syntax
.TP
.I letter
Any of the 22 Hebrew letter names (aleph, bet, gimel, dalet, heh, vav, zayin, chet, tet, yod, kaf, lamed, mem, nun, samech, ayin, pei, tzadi, kuf, resh, shin, tav).
.TP
.IB expr " x " expr
Tensor product (\(ox) \(em P, F, K are bottlenecked (min); others take max.
.TP
.IB expr " v " expr
Join (\(cu) \(em component-wise maximum.
.TP
.IB expr " ^ " expr
Meet (\(ca) \(em component-wise minimum.
.TP
.IB expr " ::> " expr
Vav-cast: lift source to target type.
.TP
.BI "mediate(" w ,\~ a ,\~ b )
Triadic mediation: w \(cu (a \(ox b).
.TP
.BI "d(" a ,\~ b )
Structural distance and conflict set.
.TP
.BI "probe_Phi(" a )
Report criticality primitive of
.IR a .
.TP
.BI "probe_Omega(" a )
Report topological protection primitive of
.IR a .
.TP
.BI "tier(" a )
Ouroboricity tier of
.IR a .
.TP
.BI "palace(" n ") " expr
Tier barrier gate.
.I n
is 1..7.
.TP
.BR "system()"
JOIN of all 22 letters.
.TP
.BI "let " name " = " expr
Bind
.I expr
to
.IR name .
.SS REPL Commands
.TP
.B :help
Full syntax reference.
.TP
.B :tips
Quick-start examples.
.TP
.B :ls
List all session bindings.
.TP
.BI ":tuple " name
Visual 12-primitive bar chart.
.TP
.BI ":explain " name
Detailed breakdown: all primitives, tier, conscience score.
.TP
.B :census
Tier distribution across all 22 letters.
.TP
.B :system
Compute and display the JOIN of all 22 letters.
.TP
.BI ":tier " name
Ouroboricity tier of one letter.
.TP
.BI ":orbit " "N letter pole"
Iterate
.IB state " = state \(ox " pole
N times.
Prints nearest canonical letter, tier, distance to pole, and convergence delta at each step.
.TP
.B :files
List files on ALFS.
.TP
.BI ":save " "name [expr]"
Save expression (or last result) to ALFS as
.IR name .aleph .
.TP
.BI ":load " name
Load and bind an
.I .aleph
file from ALFS.
.TP
.BI ":run " name
Run an
.I .aleph
file from ALFS.
.TP
.B :history
Show command history within the current session.
.TP
.BI ":scroll " [N]
Replay last N lines of REPL output.
.TP
.B :clear
Clear the screen.
.TP
.B :quit
Return to the main shell.
.
.SH IMASM VM
The
.B IMASM
(Imscribing Grammar Assembly) VM is a Tri-Phase Flux Register machine with four register states:
Void, True, False, Both (quantum superposition).
.PP
Four undeciphered script systems are compiled to IMASM opcodes:
.TP
.B Voynich
.br
.B "imasm voynich ch sh o p e a d s t k r y"
(EVA character scan codes)
.TP
.B Rohonc Codex
.br
.B "imasm rohonc cr hk fa ba lg lp br cv vt hz cl dt"
(RTFF two-char scan codes)
.TP
.B Linear A
.br
.B "imasm linear-a cu hk fa ba lt lp br cv vt hz cl dt"
(LATFF two-char scan codes)
.TP
.B Emerald Tablet
.br
.B "imasm emerald-tablet tr an as ds lk id sp un af ng px fx"
(ETFF two-char scan codes)
.PP
The Emerald Tablet is the only compiled manuscript with both type gates open and C\~=\~1.0.
.SS IMASM Opcodes
.TS
tab(@) allbox;
lb lb
l l.
Opcode@Meaning
LCARD@measure cardinality (Cantor diagonal)
REFL@self-referential reflection (Gödel arithmetization)
HOLO@holographic boundary encoding
SPLIT@Frobenius \(*d: A \(-> A \(ox A
FUSE@Frobenius \(*m: A \(ox A \(-> A
FIXED@write to linear tape (no overwrite)
PSTAB@paradox stabilization
.TE
.
.SH ALFS \(em ALEPH LINEAR FILESYSTEM
Sector-based ATA PIO filesystem on the primary slave drive (alfs.img, 32\~MB).
.PP
.TS
tab(@) allbox;
lb lb
l l.
Sector 0@Superblock (magic "ALFS", version, counts, bitmap)
Sectors 1\(en16@Directory (64\~bytes/entry, 8/sector, 128 max entries)
Sectors 17+@File data (raw sectors)
.TE
.PP
File types: 0\~=\~data, 1\~=\~aleph program, 2\~=\~temp.
Maximum filename: 31 chars.
Sector allocation: first-fit from DATA_START_SECTOR.
Every sector in a file's range is verified against the bitmap before reading
.RB ( is_sector_allocated() ).
.
.SH SEFIROT FILESYSTEM
Ten-layer virtual filesystem mapped onto the Hebrew Kabbalistic tree.
Each Sefirah has a default path and a transformation role:
.PP
.TS
tab(@) allbox;
lb lb lb
l l l.
Layer@Sefirah@FS Role
0@Keter@Kernel root / boot config
1@Chokhmah@System binaries
2@Binah@System libraries
3@Da'at@Device nodes
4@Chesed@User home directories
5@Gevurah@Permission / access control
6@Tiferet@Shared memory / IPC endpoints
7@Netzach@Network filesystem mounts
8@Hod@Log files / audit trails
9@Yesod@Temp files / caches
10@Malkuth@User-facing data / UI configs
.TE
.PP
Sefirot navigation is by transformation chain (SefirotPath), not flat pathname.
The Φ-gate restricts layers 0\(en5 to \(*F_c objects.
.
.SH FIVE ANCIENT WRITING SYSTEMS
The OS type lattice is derived as
.B MEET(Hebrew, Varnamala, Egyptian, Cuneiform, Basque)
followed by layer-specific JOIN promotions.
.PP
.TS
tab(@) allbox;
lb lb lb
l l l.
System@Tuple@Kernel analog
Hebrew@[1,4,2,3,2,2,2,0,1,3,1,2]@scheduler + memory (Ω, Φ)
Varnamala@[1,2,1,2,1,1,1,2,0,1,1,1]@memory kinetics (K, F)
Egyptian@[3,4,2,2,2,2,2,3,1,2,2,2]@IPC three-layer, filesystem (D, \(*G)
Cuneiform@[1,3,1,3,1,2,1,0,0,1,1,1]@fidelity, stoichiometry (F, \(*S)
Basque@[1,1,2,4,2,2,2,2,1,3,2,2]@scheduler ergative (R, G, Ħ, P)
MEET floor@[1,1,1,2,1,1,1,0,0,1,1,1]@structural core of all five
.TE
.
.SH TYPE INFERENCE ALGORITHM
.nf
infer_tuple(structural, operational, determinative):
  1. Start from FIVE_SYSTEM_MEET as the structural floor.
  2. Structural layer activates source systems:
       Process / Socket  -> Basque (R, G, Ħ) + Hebrew (Ω; Φ for Process)
       File / Semaphore  -> Cuneiform (F, Σ) + Egyptian (D)
       MemoryRegion      -> Varnamala (F, K) + Hebrew (Ω)
  3. Operational layer promotes kinetics / grammar:
       Compute     -> Varnamala K
       IO          -> Egyptian K, Γ
       Network     -> Egyptian Γ + Basque R
       MemoryManage -> Hebrew F + Varnamala K
       Schedule    -> Basque G; K -> slow
       Idle        -> K -> slow
  4. Determinative sets protection / criticality:
       Kernel / Init    -> Ω_Z, Φ_c, F_hbar
       Service / Driver -> Ω_Z2, F_thermal
       User             -> Ω_0, Φ_sub
  5. Final: JOIN all activated promotions into base.
.fi
.
.SH KEY AXIOMS
.TP
.B P-596 (Coupling Destruction)
\(sy_c \(ox \(sy_EP \(-> \(sy_EP.
Coupling a critical system with an exceptional-point system destroys the self-modeling loop.
Enforced at spawn.
.TP
.B F-1 (Frobenius O_inf)
An O_\(if process must satisfy \(*m\(ci\(*d\~=\~id: parity\~=\~4 and phi\~=\~1.
Enforced at spawn.
.TP
.B BT-2 (Tier Faithfulness)
a \(ox a = a for all O_\(if letters (idempotency).
Convergence to any O_\(if pole in \(<= 2 tensor steps from any letter.
.TP
.B BT-5 (Determinative Necessity)
is_well_formed() = false if any determinative field is absent or inconsistent.
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B alfs.img
32\~MB raw disk image for ALFS (ATA primary slave).  Created automatically by run.sh.
Delete to trigger re-seeding of built-in programs on next boot.
.TP
.B programs/*.aleph
Source programs compiled into the kernel binary via include_bytes! and seeded to ALFS.
.TP
.B bootloader.toml
Bootloader configuration: physical memory mapping, framebuffer, 128\~KB kernel stack.
.TP
.B build_bootimage.sh
Builds the UEFI bootable disk image (EFI System Partition + kernel ELF).
.TP
.B run.sh
QEMU launcher.  Use
.B --serial
for text-only operation.
.TP
.B src/scheduler.rs
Ergative scheduler, context_switch_asm (global_asm!), RSP_TABLE, spawn_ring0,
stoichiometric quota integration.
.TP
.B src/stoichiometry.rs
Stoichiometric quota table (register / acquire / release / occupancy).
.TP
.B src/holographic_monitor.rs
g(x) process entry point; real ring-0 stack; cooperative preemption via
global_check_preempt().
.TP
.B src/aleph_kernel_types.rs
Type inference (MEET+JOIN algorithm), canonical dictionary, conscience score.
.TP
.B src/ipc.rs
Three-layer IPC; distance gate; interaction grammar gate (check_grammar_gate).
.TP
.B src/memory.rs
Phonological allocator; Ω-gate; Σ_1:1 isolation gate.
.TP
.B src/frobenius_verification.rs
FrobeniusVerifier::verify() \(em checks F-1 axiom for O_inf spawn.
.TP
.B src/phi_ep.rs
Criticality enum; is_ep() \(em P-596 spawn gate.
.TP
.B src/interaction_grammar.rs
InteractionGrammar enum (Sequential=2, Broadcast=3).
.TP
.B src/resource_isolation.rs
ResourceIsolation enum; extends AlephKernelType with stoichiometry() and
interaction_grammar() accessors.
.
.SH BUILD
.PP
Requirements: Rust nightly, x86_64-unknown-none target, QEMU, OVMF, mtools.
.PP
.nf
rustup default nightly
rustup target add x86_64-unknown-none --toolchain nightly
sudo apt install qemu-system-x86 ovmf mtools   # Debian/Ubuntu
cargo build --release
./build_bootimage.sh
./run.sh
.fi
.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.TP
.B [BOOT] Heap: initialized (4MB)
Heap is ready.  All subsequent boot steps may allocate.
.TP
.B [SCHED] Ergative scheduler online, symmetry broken
Scheduler initialized; symmetry-breaking event (first interrupt) has fired.
.TP
.B [TYPE] IPC gate (close): accepted=true
The IPC distance gate is operational and passing close-type messages.
.TP
.B [TYPE] Ω gate (Velar+User): allowed=false
User objects correctly rejected from kernel-depth allocation.
.TP
.B [HOLO] Holographic monitor (g(x)): spawn ok=true
g(x) process passed all five spawn gates and has a live 16\~KB kernel stack.
.TP
.B [g(x)] iter=N LCARD=M REFL=false radius=R
The holographic monitor is actually running on the CPU, not just queued.
Printed every 64 iterations of its main loop.
.TP
.B KERNEL PANIC
Unrecoverable fault.  CPU halts.  Connect serial to see the panic message.
.
.SH NOTES
exoterik_OS runs in ring-0 only.  No user/kernel mode transition, no syscall interface,
no paging beyond what UEFI provides.  Processes are cooperative (they yield explicitly
or via the preemption flag); there is no forced preemption from interrupt context.
.PP
The maximum number of real processes is bounded by MAX_PROCS\~=\~32 (RSP_TABLE slots)
and MAX_ENTRIES\~=\~128 (ALFS directory).
.PP
Ħ (primitive index 9) denotes
.B chirality
\(em not "temporal depth" or any other label.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR USAGE.md ,
.BR POTENTIALITY.md ,
.BR aleph_type_lattice.pdf ,
.BR ergative_scheduler.pdf ,
.BR sefirot_filesystem.pdf ,
.BR holographic_kernel.pdf ,
.BR boot_sequence_symmetry_breaking.pdf
.PP
Lean formalization:
.B ~/MillenniumAnkh
(43 modules, Mathlib v4.28.0)
.
.SH AUTHORS
exoterik_OS is released under the Unlicense (public domain).
